# Estrous_Cycle_Classification_by_Object_Detection_Using_YOLOv8
The estrous cycle modulates the timing of reproductive events and hormonal changes in female mammals, playing an important role in further understanding the role of neuromodulators in mice. Like the menstrual cycle, the estrous cycle is characterized by four stages influenced by fluctuating hormone levels. Vaginal cytology, which classifies the four-stage estrous cycle based on three types of epithelial cell concentrations, is the most common tracking method. However, vaginal cytology has limitations as it demands significant time and training. To address these challenges the integration of object detection machine learning provides a promising approach to efficiently determine the estrous stage. Object detection has been shown to reduce the time and effort required for identification, decrease variability, and standardize outcomes. This study implements an object detection-based machine learning model by Ultralytics, YOLOv8, to identify different cell types present during various stages of the estrous cycle in mice. The images of diversely prepared samples were annotated using Makesense.ai, an online labeling tool. The dataset comprising 416 vaginal cytology images was obtained from multiple labs, out of which 333 were used for training, 43 for validation, and 40 for testing. The YOLOv8 model attains an accuracy of 93% in identifying each estrous cycle stage, decreasing the time by 97.25%, compared to manual classification. Adopting supervised machine learning for estrous cycle monitoring significantly improves the accuracy and efficiency of estrous cycle stage classification with sufficient generalization, outperforming unsupervised models, and thereby demonstrating potential advancements in research practices for studies in females.
